---
layout: post
title: Algorithm Homework Weekly - 19
excerpt: "Leetcode 297. Serialize and Deserialize Binary Tree [Hard]"
category: [algorithm homwork]
modified: 2018-01-09
---

## 297. Serialize and Deserialize Binary Tree

> Serialization is the process of converting a data structure or object into a sequence of bits so that it can be stored in a file or memory buffer, or transmitted across a network connection link to be reconstructed later in the same or another computer environment.
>
> Design an algorithm to serialize and deserialize a binary tree. There is no restriction on how your serialization/deserialization algorithm should work. You just need to ensure that a binary tree can be serialized to a string and this string can be deserialized to the original tree structure.

**My accepted code can be found [here](https://github.com/VinaLx/oj/blob/master/leetcode/297.h)**

This problem required to implement two functions, both the `serialize` and `deserialize`, it's a basic parser problem at first glance, and I solve the problem as it actually is, the performance is not quite good compared to other's.

The `serialize` generate the integer sequence by preorder traversal, and mark null pointer as `'.'`, simple as that, the algorithm is as follow:

```
serialize(node: Node): string:
    if node is null:
        return "."
    return join([string(node.value), serialize(node.left), serialize(node.right)], ',')
```

The problem requires that both algorithm cannot use local object state, so the parser comes a little tedious, since we have to pass back the parsed index of the string

```
deserialize(tree: string): Node:
    return deserialize'(tree, 0)[0]

deserialize'(tree: string, index: int): (Node, int):
    if tree[index] == ',':
        index = index + 1
    if tree[index] == '.':
        return (null, index + 1)
    let (value, index') = parseValue(tree, index)
    let (left, index'') = deserialize'(tree, index')
    let (right, index''') = deserialize'(tree, index'')
    return (Node(value, left, right), index''')

// parses tree value start with specific index
// returns the value and next index of the value
parseValue(str: string, index: int): (Value, int):
    // ...
```

The time complexity are both linear with respect to the size of the input.

## Hooray! Semester End

So this is probably the last of algorithm homework weekly, next week is for exam.